[48]
Actus Primus. Scœna Prima.
{1}
Enter the King, Lord Iohn of Lancaster, Earle of \ Westmerland, with others.

King.
      SO shaken as we are, so wan with care,
      Find we a time for frighted peace to pant
      And breathe shortwinded accents of new broils
      To be commenc'd in Stronds a‑farre remote:
      No more the thirsty entrance of this Soile,
      Shall daub her lippes with her owne childrens blood:
      No more shall trenching Warre channell her fields,
      Nor bruise her Flowrets with the Armed hoofes
      Of hostile paces. Those opposed eyes,
      Which, like the Meteors of a troubled Heauen,
      All of one Nature, of one Substance bred,
      Did lately meet in the intestine shocke,
      And furious cloze of ciuill Butchery,
      Shall now in mutuall well‑beseeming rankes
      March all one way, and be no more oppos'd
      Against Acquaintance, Kindred, and Allies.
      The edge of Warre, like an ill‑sheathed knife,
      No more shall cut his master. Therefore Friends,
      As farre as to the Sepulcher of Christ,
      Whose Souldier now vnder whose blessed Crosse
      We are impressed and ingag'd to fight,
      Forthwith a power of English shall we leuie,
      Whose armes were moulded in their mothers wombe,
      To chase these pagans in those holy Fields,
      Ouer whose acres walk'd those blessed feete
      Which fourteene hundred yeares ago were nail'd
      For our aduantage on the bitter Crosse.
      But this our purpose is a tweluemonth old,
      And bootlesse 'tis to tell you we will go:
      Therefore we meete not now. Then let me heare
      Of you my gentle Cousin Westmerland,
      What yesternight our Councell did decree,
      In forwarding this deare expedience.
    
West.
      My Liege: This haste was hot in question,
      And many limits of the Charge set downe
      But yesternight: when all athwart there came
      A Post from Wales, loaden with heauy Newes;
      Whose worst was, That the Noble Mortimer,
      Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
      Against the irregular and wilde Glendower,
      Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
      And a thousand of his people butchered:
{2}
      Vpon whose dead corpes there was such misuse,
      Such beastly, shamelesse transformation,
      By those Welshwomen done, as may not be
      (Without much shame) re‑told or spoken of.

King.
      It seems then that the tidings of this broile,
      Brake off our businesse for the Holy land.

West.
      This matcht with other like, my gracious Lord,
      Farre more vneuen and vnwelcome Newes
      Came from the North, and thus it did report:
      On Holy‑roode Day, the gallant Hotspurre there,
      Young Harry Percy, and braue Archibald,
      That euer‑valiant and approoued Scot,
      At Holmeden met, where they did spend
      a sad and bloody houre:
      As by discharge of their Artillerie,
      And shape of likely‑hood the newes was told;
      For he that brought them, in the very heate
      And pride of their contention did take horse,
      Vncertaine of the issue any way.


King.
      Heere is a deere, and true industrious friend,
      Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his Horse,
      Strain'd with the variation of each soyle,
      Betwixt that Holmodenand this Seat of ours:
      And he hath brought vs smooth and welcomes newes.
      The Earle of Dowglasis discomfited,
      Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty Knights
      Balk'd in their owne blood did Sir Waltersee
      On Holmedons Plaines. Of Prisoners, Hotspurre tooke
      Mordake Earle of Fife, and eldest sonne
      To beaten Dowglas, and the Earle of Atholl,
      Of Murry, Angus, and Menteith.
      And is not this an honourable spoyle?
      A gallant prize? Ha Cosin, is it not? Infaith it is.

West.
      A Conquest for a prince to boast of.

King.
      Yea, there thou mak'st me sad, &amp; mak'st me sin,
      In enuy that my Lord Northumberland
      Should be the Father of so blest a Sonne:
      A Sonne, who is the Theame of Honors tongue;
      Among'st a Groue, the very straightest Plant,
      Who is sweet Fortunes Minion, and her Pride:
      Whil'st I by looking on the praise of him,
      See Ryot and Dishonor staine the brow
      Of my yong Harry. O that it could be prou'd,
      That some Night‑tripping‑Faiery, had exchang'd
      In Cradle‑clothes, our Children where they lay,
      And call'd mine Perey, his Plantagenet:
      

[49]
{1}

      Then would I haue his Harry, and he mine:
      But let him from my thoughts. What thinke you Coze
      Of this young Perciespride? The Prisoners
      Which he in this aduenture hath surpriz'd,
      To his owne vse he keepes, and sends me word
      I shall haue none but Mordake Earle of Fife.

West.
      This is his Vnckles teaching. This is Worcester
      Maleuolent to you in all Aspects:
      Which makes him prune himselfe, and bristle vp
      The crest of Youth against your Dignity.


King.
      But I haue sent for him to answer this:
      And for this cause a‑while we must neglect
      Our holy purpose to Ierusalem.
      Cosin, on Wednesday next, our Councell we will hold
      At Windsor, and so informe the Lords:
      But come your selfe with speed to vs againe,
      For more is to be said, and to be done,
      Then out of anger can be vttered.


West.
      I will my Liege.

Exeunt.
